# Structures JSON Specification V1.0-DRAFT

## Authors

- Dan "Ducky" Little - @theduckylittle

## Intent

This specification is intended as a data interchange format for 3D structures.
The format is intended to be easily translated into other formats and support data integrity
across the interchange format.


## Assumptions

A. Units: Unless otherwise specified units are in meters and square-meters.
B. Projections: All projections assume a WGS84 spheroid definition. The structure JSON format must specify one of the following projections

 * ECEF. This is the assumed projection for coordinates.
 * UTM. Must include zone and hemisphere.
 * GeoJSON style WGS84 with meters above ground elevation.
 * Planar. This is a simple format in meters which 0,0 is the lower left hand corner of a drawing. All coordinates are relative to that point.

## Comparison to other formats

- [GeoJSON](https://geojson.org/): GeoJSON is great example of creating a simple, easily parsed, and highly portable geometry contains using JSON. 
- [TopoJSON](https://github.com/topojson/topojson-specification): TopoJSON has a similar design philosophy where polygons are composed of arcs.

## Lessons learned from others

- Avoid the property name `type`. GeoJSON uses `type` but that complicates implementation in languages which are strict about not re-using reserved words.
- Limit projections. Projections are specifically enumerated to prevent the need to include a full projections package such as proj. This helps to minimize direct dependencies for the implementer.

## Sample

```
{
    "kind": "structure",
    "projection": "ecef",
    "points": {
        "0011AA": {
            "kind": "corner",
            "coordinates": [-1234.56, 1234.56, 1000.5],
        },
        "qq99": {
            "kind": "placemarker",
            "coordinates": [-1234.56, 1234.56, 1000.5],
            "properties": {
                "detail": "Roof Vent"
            },
            "on": "roof0"
        },
        "ground": {
            "kind": "ref",
            "coordinates": [-1234.56, 1234.56, 1000.5]
        }
    },
    "edges": {
        "foobar": {
            "kind": "eave",
            "points": ["0011AA", "0022AA", "0033CC"],
            "properties": {
                "attachments": "gutter"
            }
        }
    },
    "surfaces": {
        "roof0": {
            "kind": "roof",
            "edges": [
                ["foobar", "barfoo", "hggy1"], ["bacde", "xyz", "edge10"]
            ],
            "properties": {
                "material": "asphalt"
            },
        },
       "wall0": {
            "kind": "wall",
            "edges": [...],
            "properties": {
                "material": "vinyl"
            }
        }
    },
    "components": {
        "roof": {
            "properties": {
                "style": "hip",
            },
            "surfaces": ["roof0", "roof1"]
        }
    }
}
```

## Definition

### <a href="#section-1">1.</a> Structure Object

A Structure object represents a collection of points, edges, and surfaces.

* A Structure object is JSON object.
* A Structure object MUST have a member with the name `kind` with the value `structure`.
* A Structure object may contain a member with the name `projection` which specifies the geographic projection. [See section 2.](#section-2)
* A Structure object MUST have at least one member with the names `points`, `edges`, `surfaces`, `walls`.

### <a href="#section-2">2.</a> Projections

Structure object projections are limited to an enumerated list. This prevents the implementer from needing to support a large code base for interchange purposes.
All projections assume as WGS84 spheroid.

* Structure objects without a `projection` member are assumed to be in [ECEF projection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth-centered,_Earth-fixed_coordinate_system) and defined as [EPSG:4978](https://epsg.io/4978).
* Structure objects MAY specify one of the [UTM projections](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_Transverse_Mercator_coordinate_system). UTM projections MUST include both the hemisphere and the zone in the definition string separated by `:`. For example, `utm:16:s` defines the UTM Zone 16, Southern Hemisphere.
* Structure objects MAY specify [GeoJSON style WGS84 coordinates](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7946#section-4). This is defined by using the decimal degree longitude, latitude, and elevation in meters similar to [EPSG:4326](https://epsg.io/4326).
* Structure objects MAY specify `planar` for an unprojected drawn structure where 0,0 defines the lower left hand corner of the drawing.

#### Examples

*Geodetic*
```
  "projection": "ecef"
```

*UTM*
```
  "projection": "utm:15:n"
```

*WGS84 Decimal Degrees*
```
  "projection": "crs84"
```

*Planar*
```
  "projection": "planar"
```

### <a href="#section-3">3.</a> points object

The points object represents a location in space. Points object members are named by their unique identifier.

* Point identifiers MAY be any valid member name.
* Point objects MUST contain a "kind" member.
* Implementations MUST honor the following values for the "kind" member:
    * `corner` - An arbitrary corner for a shape.
    * `ref` - A point in space that may or may not have additional properties.
* Implementations MAY use additional values for the "kind" member.
* Point objects MAY contain an "on" member. The "on" member references a "surface" object on which the point is intended to reside.
* Point objects MUST contain a "coordinates" member.
* The value of "coordinates" is dependent on the projection specified. [See section 2](#section-2)
    * `ecef` - Coordinates MUST be in the order of X, Y, Z.
    * `crs84` - Coordinates MUST be in the order of longitude, latitude, elevation.
    * `utm` - Coordinates MUST be in the order of easting, northing, elevation.
* Point objects MAY contain a "properties" member which MUST be an object.
* Properties objects MAY be used to define additional information about the point object. 

### <a href="#section-4">4.</a> edges object

Edges are objects represent component parts of a structure that follow a linear path.
Edges object members are named by their unique identifier.

* Edges identifiers MAY be any valid member name.
* Edges objects MUST contain a "kind" member.
* Edges objects MUST contain a "points" member.
* The value of the "points" member MUST be an array of AT LEAST TWO identifiers that are defined in the "points" object. [See section 3](#section-3)
* Edges objects MAY contain a "properties" member which MUST be an object.
* Properties objects MAY be used to define additional information about the edge object. 

### <a href="#section-5">5.</a> surfaces object

The surfaces object contains a unique set of surfaces representing the structure.

* Each member of a surfaces object MUST have a unique identifier. An individual member is a "surface" object.
* surface identifiers MAY be any valid member name.
* surface objects MUST contain an "edges" member. The value of the "edges" member MUST be an array of arrays identifiers that are defined in the "edges" object. All "edges" objects must be coplanar. [See section 4](#section-4)
* The first array of the "edges" member is considered the outside ring. Subsequent members of the array are holes in the surface.
* Each ring MUST be coplanar or else the surface will be considered invalid.
* surface objects MAY contain a "properties" member which MUST be an object.
* Properties objects MAY be used to define additional information about the surface object. 
* surface objects MAY have a "kind" member which specifies the role the surface provides in the structure. Common values for the "kind" of surface would include:
    * `roof` - This is a roof face.
    * `wall` - This is a wall of the structure.

### <a href="#section-6">6.</a> components 

The components object contains a unique set of building components representing the structure. Components are a union of individual surfaces that can be used to create logical groupings.

* Each member of the components object MUST have a unique identifier. An individual member is a "component" object.
* component identifiers MAY be any valid member name.
* component objects MAY contain a "properties" member which MUST be an object.
* Properties objects MAY be used to define additional information about the component object. 
* Each component object MUST have a surfaces list which contains the surfaces which are members of the component.
